In this lecture, you'll learn about Static NAT which is the first of the available NAT types that
we're going to cover. With static NAT, it's a permanent one to one mapping, usually between a public
and private IP address.
This is used for servers which must accept incoming connections. For example, your mail server or
a public Web server
if you're hosting that yourself. The next type is dynamic NAT that uses a pool of public addresses
which are given out on an as needed, first come, first served basis.
These are usually used for internal hosts which need to connect out to the Internet that they don't accept
incoming connections.
And the last NAT type is PAT, Port Address Translation.
This allows the same public IP address to be reused and we're going to be covering the other two types,
dynamic NAT and PAT in detail later on in this section.
With the examples I'm going to be giving you, this is NAT lab that we're using. So you can see that
we are the organization over on the left and R1 is our Internet edge router.
We've got a server, which is INT-S1, Internal Server 1, which is at 10.0.1.10.
And then we've got our internal normal hosts, our normal desktops out on another IP subnet, as you
would see in the real world. They're on the 10.0.2.0/24 subnet.
So we need to configure a static NAT rule, to allow incoming connections to Internal Server 1, because
it's running public services like it's a Web server and it's supporting users out on the Internet.
Or maybe it's our mail server and we need to accept email coming into the organization. Down below,
you'll see the PCs. They're not running any services that people on the Internet need to connect into,
but they need to be able to connect out to the Internet. For example, for our users browsing webpages.
So that's what we're going to be configuring. For the examples,
we've got EXT-S1 over on the right.
That is an external server that I'm just going to use for testing and for checking that NAT is working.
So our static NAT scenario, we've bought the range of public IP addresses, 203.0.113.0/28
from our service provider. It's a /28, so that gives us 14 public IP addresses.
Of those addresses, 203.0.113.2 is used on the outside interface on our Internet
edge router, R1.
So let's just look at the diagram again.
You can see we've got 203.0.113.0/28,
is our range of public IP addresses on our outside interface fa0/0 on R1.
And we're using 203.0.113.2 on our outside interface and over on the service
provider side of that link, 203.0.113.1 is being used there.
So that leaves 203.0.113.3-203.0.113.14
available that we can assign.
INT-S1 at 10.0.1.10
is an internal Web server which needs to accept incoming connections from the Internet so that people
out on the Internet can browse our website.
So we need to assign a fixed public IP address to accept incoming connections.
We will use the first available address in our range.
That was 203.0.113.3.
So that gives us a permanent public IP address that external people can use to connect them to our Web
server.
We're using a private IP address in the inside of 10.0.1.10.
So we're going to need to configure a static permanent NAT translation to translate the public IP
address 203.0.113.3 on the outside fa0/0 interface to 10.0.1.10
on the inside fa1/0 interface for voice incoming connections.
Now, the translation is bidirectional.
So we're going to configure the static NAT translation for traffic coming from the outside to
the inside.
Our server also needs to send traffic back out to the Internet as well, but we don't need to configure
a separate NAT rule for that.
Our static NAT rules are bidirectional.
So it will also take care of the outgoing traffic.
So here is how we do the configuration. So on R1, first off, we need to specify which interface is
the outside and which is the inside.
So we say interface fa0/0, ip nat outside, and then interface fa1/0,
ip nat inside.
Then we configure the static NAT translation. For that, we say ip nat inside
source static 10.0.1.10 is the inside IP address, 203.0.113.3 is the outside
IP address and that's it.
That's the whole config.
Now whenever the host 10.0.1.10, since traffic coming in on interface fa1/0 and
it's going out to the outside, out fa0/0,
the router will change its source IP address on that outbound traffic from 10.0.1.10,
to 203.0.113.3.
So that's for the outgoing traffic. For the incoming traffic,
whenever traffic comes in with 203.0.113.3 as the destination address, coming
in on interface fa0/0 on the outside,
the router will change that destination address to 10.0.1.10 and send it through to interface
fa1/0.
So this is going to take care of our NAT translation for traffic in both directions.
To verify that is working, send some traffic to or from that host  with the outside and then do the
command show ip nat translation. And there's quite a lot to the output there.
So I'll explain that in the next lecture.